Good morning. This is Tom Morg from the
Leading Edge. Uh today I'm joined by my
dear friend Devon Martin, an experienced
transformational and psychedelic
integration coach. And thanks to an
introduction uh from our mutual friend
Scott Shadian, I'm also enjoined by
joined by Dr. Christopher Bash. Uh he is
professor emmeritus in the department of
philosophy and religious studies at
Youngstown State University, adjunct
faculty at the California Institute of
Integral Studies, Emmeritus fellow at
the Institute of Noetic Sciences and on
the advisory council of gra legacy
training. Uh Dr. Bass is perhaps best
known for his remarkable 2019 book LSD
in the mind of the universe. It relates
his insights and experiences from 73
therapeutically structured massive dose
LSD sessions and experiences uh over the
20 years from 1979 to 1999. Um I've been
revisiting the book uh in preparation
for this interview and it truly is
remarkable and I would recommend for
anyone to read it. Firstly, Dr. Thank
you so much for joining us.
>> It's an honor. Thank you Tom and thank
you Devin. I look forward to our
conversation today. So if we may kick
off um to anyone who hasn't read the
book uh and is is listening kind of
mouth a gape at at that introduction
could you just explain uh sort of why
you decided uh to go after this modality
and what you experienced in your session
>> well I was just a junior faculty member
just starting my teaching career 1978
and I read Stan Gross realms of the
human unconscious and I just I knew I
had to do this work it just felt like a
life calling
And so I began secretively privately
a course of LSD therapy following Stan
GR's protocol. And I chose to work with
high doses following that protocol. And
I kind of took that and pushed it to its
limits. And I want to say upfront I do
not recommend that people do what I do
did. If I were doing it over again, I'd
do it gentler more gently. I'd be kinder
on my body. uh but what I did I did
about five sessions a year. I worked for
four years. I stopped for six years for
reasons I didn't give in the book and
then I resumed for a very intense
10-year period doing on average about
five sessions a year holding it all
privately and then um after I finished I
published the darknet early dawn but the
full story of the journey where it went
is in uh LSD in the mind of the universe
and basically what I found is that if
you work consistently internally focus
focused, keep your attention within and
confront whatever is emerging within
you. First the personal stuff emerges
and then that takes you through a death
and rebirth process catapulting you into
a deeper level of of reality. And after
working that level of reality and going
through the purification process is
there a third and fourth and for me a
fifth level of reality. And just broadly
speaking, I describe these in terms of
the personal mind, the collective mind,
the collective psyche, archetypal mind,
deeper than the collective psyche,
causal mind, and then the diamond
luminosity. And so that's the journey
that I'm describing.
Can you share a little bit about your
personality? I'm very intrigued by the
type of human being who chooses to take
five hits of LSD repeatedly. I've
dabbled in that realm myself and I've
always thought of myself as kind of a
bold psychonaut willing to do crazy
things, but you've gone so much far
beyond.
>> Uh, have you always been that type of
person? Was there something about this
protocol that just you trusted? Like how
did you land there?
>> Yeah. Well, I was trained as a
philosopher who had a deep passion for
knowing. I was trained initially I was
studied to be a priest when I was in
high school in one year of college. Uh
celibacy and I eventually didn't get
along together. This was in a Catholic
tradition. I always had an intense
desire to understand the structure of
reality, the deep structure. I I really
wanted to understand a world of
suffering and I finished my graduate
school as an agnostic just you know I
studied my way out of religion
altogether.
Uh but I had a passion to learn and when
Stan I saw this method that Stan had uh
had developed over 15 years 20 years I
saw it as not only a psychological
assistant by amplifying the unconscious
your personal pains come forward and can
be addressed and healed but I saw it as
a philosophical method. This is a way of
working systematically that allows us to
engage deeper and deeper levels of one's
consciousness until eventually crossing
levels entering into larger bandwidths
of consciousness systematically
gathering the experiences holding them
digesting them opening up again. How far
could it go? How far can it go? How big
is the universe? So I just had this
passion uh to take it uh as far as I
could and uh that happened to be 73
sessions. I worked at 500 to 600
micrograms and I was a fool to do it
like that. I would eat it differently
today.
>> How would you do it differently today?
Would you start slowly with the dosing
and work your way up to that point or
would you not go there at all?
>> I would go there but I would go there
more punctuatedly in a more punctuated
manner. I would work with lower doses.
Uh I would balance psilocybin for
example or I was with LSD. They each
have different properties and how they
influenced. I would be working in a way
to make sure that I was integrating more
as I went. And I always did that, but I
think if I had worked with more varied
doses, I I might not have gotten as far
in the end.
>> But I think I would have been more
stable with where I got
>> than I was doing it the way I did
because doing it the way I did took me
so deeply into the ecstasy.
of the divine light that is the source
of all reality. Coming out of that and
trying to return to a normal life with
those overwhelmingly
magnificent cosmic memories.
It turned out that that was a lot harder
to hold than I had anticipated. Yeah.
Can you give me some and you know my
clients some advice? I mean so what I do
is I I don't ever administer anything
but I help people prepare for the
experience and then afterwards most of
what I do is helping them integrate the
experience.
>> Yeah. And and so preparation for me is,
you know, everything from philosophical
study to diet to physical health, but
[snorts] also very much, you know,
meditation, breath work, learning how to
navigate your inner world, having tools
you can apply in the experience and then
coming out. It's very much making sense
of what happened
>> and then looking for messages from, you
know, your soul or some collective
higher being or some whatever it is that
will show you how to live differently.
And I know you suffered immensely hiding
this. And so I'm curious, did you feel
like preparation and integration were
something that you could advise other
people to do better? And if so, how?
What you just described is an excellent
description of the approach I took.
>> I I basically we call them sessions, but
in Japanese a meditation period is a
sasheen.
>> Yeah. And I thought think of these as
sashim periods of intense spiritual
practice where you prepare yourself
physically diet diet-wise. Uh I would
make sure my spine was properly aligned
going in yoga meditation and I think I
always was meditating during all of my
sessions during all of the years that I
was doing the sessions. And so the the
training of meditation, how to watch and
observe without getting involved and how
to what happens when content comes up
and you're just held in awareness what
happens to it. All those are very useful
tools to take into psychedelic space.
And so certainly the day of a session
centering
really the fundamental question is that
if you depending on how you're working
but is it a good day to die? Are you
willing to die today? You know, you have
to really measure what you're willing to
put up on any session. Sometimes it's
not a good day to die. Sometimes it's a
good day just to flex uh and not shatter
the limits. Uh and then you're right.
Then you I completely submit myself to
whatever emerges. I let it take me
wherever it wants to go with or without
comprehension. I just go into the
experience. And then coming out of the
experience, taking advantage of the long
tale that LSD gives you, longer than
others, but all of them give you a tale
of processing your experiences,
beginning to put it together, and and
learning how to describe things that you
don't understand. I think that's one of
the arts. There's parts you do
understand, then there's other things
you don't understand, but you will
understand them later probably when more
light is thrown on those experiences. So
I think what you described is very much
how I work.
>> What one of the things that I think
comes up for people that aren't as
familiar with psychedelic experience is
the trustworthiness of psychedelic
experience. And you engaged in a lovely
dialogue with the near-death experience
expert Kenneth Ring that I'll I'll link
to in our show notes. And he, you know,
he he makes the point that, you know,
what if the broad arc of your vision was
this, you know, this this this this
tortuous death and then this glorious
rebirth into heavenly spaces. And he
says that maybe that's just cultural
conditioning that, you know, we are so
embedded in the Christian context that
that is the that you know, the
archetypal arc that we are the water
that we're swimming in. you said um that
actually even as as an expert in
religious studies, you were surprised by
a lot of the information that came to
you. I'd be very interested by what you
mean by that and also how you would
respond to people that push back on the
trustworthiness of your experience.
Yeah, I think it's a really important
question and the first time I addressed
this was in dark night early dawn in the
first chapter when I was describing the
methodology that I was going to be
introducing in the book and I have a
section called the epistemic value of
psychedelic experience and this kind of
a technical discussion why how can we
trust these experiences why do we think
they're trustworthy and I point to
several pieces of evidence one is uh
sometimes we do discover things which
can be tested in time and space that you
see somebody doing something, you see
something taking place, you can verify
that that happens. Sometimes you learn
something that you had no idea about and
you can verify through medicine or
anthropology that these things are true.
Um,
but I think it's something like u an and
I don't remember the author, forgive me,
of a person, a doctor who studied
near-death experiences in card in
cardiac arrest patients and he was
wanted to disprove these. He was really
upset the metaphysical claims coming out
of these experiences. So he
differentiated between the near nearby
death near-death experience and the
transcendent. and he hypothesized if we
can verify the nearby reports. It
doesn't prove but it gives us attended
extra credibility to the transcendent
aspects I think we can take the same
approach to psychedelic experiences.
One of the key issues is are these
experiences replicable? If you take a
two people from very different cultural
backgrounds and use the same protocol
are they going to experience the same
thing? And what we find is that uh in
the early stages, no, they're not
experiencing the same thing because
they're coming at it from different
cultural and personal histories and
those are being turned off. But once you
come through certain death protocols,
once you go through the ego death,
there's a striking similarity in the in
the world which they encounter. Now they
encounter the world in different depths
in different taking different steps but
there is a fundamental ontological
convergence that emerges in the
experience. So what one person's
experiences is of course always fallable
and never to be too much weight on but
if there is a congruence between many
people's experience I think it ups
credibility in the end however
it's about experience and it's it's not
as much about the the cognitive ideas
but in terms of the credibility there is
a Now
there is a depth of experience
which is deeper than human sensate
experience. It's clear when you were in
it that this is a a meta paradigm state.
This is a meta state. Uh this is a state
which is more real than time space is
moving into these places. Now
working within time and space which
that's ridiculous. That's a
hallucination. has to be who nation. But
the people who actually go there
understand and they understand the
cosmology that time space is a
manifested reality and there is a
manifesting reality behind time and
space within time and space and you can
we tap into it in all sorts of ways not
just psychedelics.
The cosmology that emerged in my
sessions was essentially identical with
the cosmologies that emerged in the
great mystical traditions, the great,
you know, so there's nothing new. It's
just a different way of entering into
that that world.
One of the things I wanted to really
hammer down on was reincarnation that
you know, you describe you your way in
like mine was Dr. Stevenson's work at
UVA. Um, and you know, I think you and I
both believe that that the the more
widespread belief in reincarnation is
truly a lynch pin for the paradigm shift
in consciousness away from kind of, you
know, nihilistic materialism. But one of
the things you said in the book that I
wanted to get a little bit more detail
on is also this idea that I think comes
from Newton's journey of souls that
there is this aspect of pre-incarnative
choice where you you you you decide on
your curriculum before you go to earth
school. Um there clearly there were
correspondences with Newton's views but
I just wanted to know what they were in
your direct experience.
>> I think it's something like uh
kindergarten through graduate school. We
don't let the kitties have much of a
choice in their incarnation. We give
them a lot of structure. But the older
you get the more choice you have in
shaping your curriculum. I think it's
something like that with souls too. So
that by this time I think that we can
assume that most of the people here have
had enough lives that they go through
this process of choosing their
incarnation.
And
reincarnation is so fundamental to me
that it it the first book I wrote was on
reincarnation because it seemed like
your worldview is divided. If you
believed in only one time through, you
go here. If you believe in
reincarnation, you're going there. It's
just that you move in different
directions. So to me, I think you're
right, Tom, Devin. This is simply a fact
of nature. We've proven it. We've
demonstrated it in every imaginable way.
Former life memories come up inside of
us. When we heal them, we heal
ourselves. Uh there are positive
nurturing lives that we carry within us.
When we draw on them, we get stronger.
We are able to receive and understand
more. For me, one of the ways this
manifested in my work was
having former life memories uh come
forward spontaneously
uh with specific people in my life and
in a very healing way, healing that
relationship, healing the wound that a
wound that was carried in that
incarnation. In another way, I came to
learn my life. I experienced my life,
what my purpose was, what my choice was.
I didn't these things kind of unfold,
you know, kind of in time because
sometimes it's not good for us to know
too much in the beginning, but
eventually, you know, if you go in so
many times so deeply, you see what the
purpose of your life was, you feel it
more consciously. It's not buried
unconsciously. It it it merges into you.
And I believe that my life really was
about doing this psychedelic work. It
really was about learning to navigate
the intense inner canyons and and
profound spaces that this work can take
you into and to understand to understand
some of the warp and woof of the
universe. You know, that's
>> I I I believe you said you were able to
work with past lives via hypnotism as
well.
>> Yeah. I'm curious, is there a specific
past life that you'd be willing or able
to talk about so we could get a sense of
what this work looks like?
>> Well, I during the six-year hiatus when
I wasn't doing psychedelics, I would I
was doing past life therapy for three
years, hypnotic kind of work. I
uncovered about a dozen life lives. Uh
worked with them. Some of them were just
kind of my understanding of the soul.
The soul may have hundreds of lives
incorporated into its being, but not all
of those hundreds of lives would
manifest in me. There's a much smaller
It's like playing cards. You get only
some of the cards from the deck and
that's your hand. And some of these
former lives converge into me and this
that's my hand. Um
I didn't find anyone significant at that
time. I found u
a Chinese merchant. I found an Irish
barmaid. I found an Indian fighter. I
found a brave uh an Indian who fought
with Coochis Coochis. I found a priest
on the southwestern United States who
seemed to be what the seed catalyst for
my driving passion to understand because
he was a he was a priest who ministered
to a ring of parishes and uh these were
suffering peasants who were being you
know brutalized by their overlords and
their life was hard and this priest
believed in a loving God that and He hit
and he could never answer the people's
question. Why am I suffering? Why is
there so much suffering? And I think
that his frustration there and his
conflict and his commitments and what he
was seeing
was part of what drove me to really
understand. I wanted to understand
the structure of the world so that there
can be this so much exponential growth
and yet such hard hard times hard you
know periods that people go through you
know um one former life I found uh had a
very deep effect on me. I found a uh
Native American old man who was the seer
for his tribe. He was a visionary. He
was a shaman and he was living outside
of a camp and uh I learned that it is
his comfortableness with working with
peyote and and medicines of his period
that made me comfortable with it that
allowed me to be understand. So it was
his life that laid the foundation for my
psychedelic practice.
>> It's unbelievable. So that that leads me
into the question of suffering. that uh
in one of your other interviews I heard
you say something to the effect that the
purpose um and the role of the
individual in this process and these
repeated rebirths is to become
energetically stronger so that they can
perceive more and more of the universe
more and more accurately. Is that a
correct interpretation?
Well, that was my passion. But you know
there different people who bring
different hearts and minds to to the
engagement. You're engaging infinite
potential, infinite knowledge. So your
being is like you drop you your being is
it's a catalyst and it catalyzes
something out of this infinite potential
and then if you keep at it the catalyst
keeps you keep changing it keeps evoking
different experiences. Someone who has a
passion for music, who has a passion for
creativity or a passion for art, they
might evoke different potentials. Right?
My passion was to try to understand the
deep structure of reality. And I've come
to maybe appreciate a little bit more
that that passion was a distinctive seed
catalyst that evoked these distinctive
experiences out of it. But the reality
that people engage is so much larger
than any one person's experience of it.
It's infinite potential, infinite
knowledge, just infinite energy and
capacity.
How much can you take in? Well, what are
you willing to pay?
>> How much purification are you willing to
to go through in order to free your mind
to able to travel at those bandwidths of
reality?
>> And and do you believe that you can
achieve very high transcendent states
without suffering? Some people seem to
just wake up.
>> Yeah.
>> What is is that past life work that just
blossoms in this life or is there a
shortcut?
>> Well, there may be shortcuts, but I
think a lot of it is where people are in
their incarnational history. Teresa of
Avia, one of my favorite saints, and she
suffered a dark night of the soul that
lasted over 20 years, just suffered
terribly and eventually blossomed in a
profound mystical realization.
Trica Vur popped into mystical
realization when she was 15 16 years
old. She just popped into it. So I
assume that people are at different
stages going through these boundaries.
But I want to emphasize that
what I found to be I didn't understand
it in the beginning but what I found to
be my work was not popping the bubble of
ego and entering into discovering
transcendence.
That wasn't my project. My project was
what I now call cosmological
exploration.
Exploring deeper into the universe and
coming back with an understanding. Going
out into the universe, coming back with
an understanding. It's a different
project to stand centered in reality and
want to
through the the focusing of your
awareness enter into the transparent
condition where all the thought small
things just fall away and the life of
the large thing emerges.
That's what I think we think of as
enlightenment. think of a spiritual
awakening and psychedelics can help you
with that I think. But if I were using
psychedelics to achieve that specific
thing, I would have done it differently.
I would have worked with low doses and
work with meditative states and worked
kind of more on the meditative side of
things using psychedelics to open up
some. What I did was different. Just
smashing the structure, just blowing the
mind apart radically, just seeing how
far the bubble could go. And and it's
it's dying. I think of it as not dying
to successive levels of ego. I think
there is dying which takes place at the
egoic level. And that's transcending
your time space identity. And then
you're in uh subtle level reality.
subtle level reality is kind of like the
girders of the universe. They're the the
backbones, the hidden structure. It's
kind of like if if the self if the being
if we were in a condominium high-rise
condominium and we're in rooms
subtle level reality is the steel
girders that hold the building in place.
It's how things work at at the
collective level. When that falls away,
that's a very different death than ego
death.
There there was a time for me after
going through the subtle of reality
coming to a point where that combustion
and it fell away and with it all of
human history fell away from my mind.
all of the stories we've been telling
ourselves and all of the libraries with
all of the philosophies fell away and I
entered into a level of awareness that
was transhuman and I don't like that
word but beyond
human morphic the human field the human
species mind
to to die as an individual is a
distinctive experience to die as a
species to die letting go all the
cognitive structures that are come into
your capacity with the species. It's a
different kind of death. It was then I
entered into archetypal reality into a
deeper structural level
and after a time at that level another
kind of death that took me into a higher
tier of reality.
Each my understanding is that each level
of reality operates at a higher
frequency. A high it's kind of like this
110 240 you know 880 whatever and in
order to have coherent experience at
that level you have to allow your body
to go through a process of literally
kind of reworking your energy. When I
talk about detoxification and
purification, these are not like
personal unconscious, you know, getting
out the muck of the personal shadow.
It's a very different process. It's kind
of like learning how to sit on top of a
volcano and let that energy run through
you and blow your entire system so that
you can then move into a state where you
can stay conscious at that level of
reality for hours at a time. A lot of
people have contact with these levels of
reality, but it's kind of like short
illuminating like a
lightning in a dark desert. Or they have
contact, but it's not long enough to be
able to
draw it in and hold it and use it. And
that's why to me this is a a new
philosophical method. you spoke about uh
having being comfortable with
incoherence and I feel like that was a
really important point. People black out
or pull back or tense up when things
don't make sense when it becomes
incoherent. But you seem to have some
ability to just witness that and allow
it and trust that maybe later it would
make sense or even if it doesn't it's
somehow still valuable.
>> Yeah. I found that pain was a limit. You
have to be willing to experience pain.
incoherence will see to me a deeper
letting go. I mean, this is what your
whole sanity is on the line. You're
going into deeper and deeper states of
just it not making sense. Just it's not
making sense. Incoherence
and then eventually
that dissolves. Whatever it is, whatever
it was, it said dissolves and your mind
opens to a radically expanded uh
experience of reality. And did going
through all of this paranatal, all of
the burning off of karma, did you feel
like that translated into your average
day-to-day waking experience, was being
able to hold a deeper truth of reality
directly showing up in your life?
It was um I mean I I've been a teacher
of religious studies and comparative
mysticism and Buddhism, psychology of
religion all my life. So I naturally was
reading in those fields. I I just my
mind traveled in those waters.
Um and I it did change me. Uh uh it
changed me. It made me a better father.
Uh changed me but more slowly than I
would have liked. I I think it continues
to change me and I think it will
continue to change my next incarnation.
What I found is that um
integration is a tricky thing and I
think as long as we're talking about
integrating things out of the personal
level of reality, we have an
understanding of how that works. We have
therapeutic models for that. If it's
spiritual levels of reality, you're
getting into the experiences of that. We
still have models for what that looks
like in our mystical traditions and our
spiritual guidance. But when you when
you go into the radically deep waters of
the psyche, you know, when you get into
territory which only the the most
devoted spiritual beings
have access to, but even to touch it for
hours at a time.
Um,
I really question even what it means.
How is it possible to integrate states
like that into
my life and any
how do you integrate states of
timelessness
into time consciousness?
You remember it, you may paint it, you
write it, describe it. It may change how
you view the world.
But integrating those experiences to
become a being who can live in an
abiding way even near those realities
that's a multiple lifetime I think
agenda.
>> Do you do you have much experience with
extroverted psychedelic doses? I've done
a lot of work eyes closed inward using
music and meditation but I've also run
around in the woods and played with
friends and for me that's been a very
helpful form of integration and
embodiment. I'm curious if you thought
about that or played with it.
>> You know, as I can understand what
you're talking about. That makes a lot
of sense to me. Um I have done uh some
psychedelics in nature, lighter doses,
just letting nature come alive in that
way. Uh after this came after my journey
work, so my mind was already pretty
porous from all that work. Uh playing in
nature. Well, that would be fun,
wouldn't it? I think that could be
really good for the body. Yeah.
>> So to return to um to your explorations,
you know, those those five concentric
circles you describe of personal mind,
collective mind, archetypal mind, causal
mind where you you had this experience
of oneness, but then you talk about I
believe final four sessions uh of the
diamond luminosity which is is a central
theme of your book. Could you just
describe that as best as you can for
listeners?
Well, I'd already gone through these
four layers. I I'd entered into calls of
reality. I'd been given four incredible
gifts at that level. Just deep spiritual
gifts. Uh deep understandings.
It gave me a deeper understanding of
where reincarnation is taking humanity.
I was as satisfied as any philosopher
could be. And yet there was still um
five years of the work of the journey
ahead. And that's when I went through
yet another death and rebirth.
And when I came through it, I w awoke. I
came into a state of light of clarity
that was beyond. And I had entered into
light many times. But all of those times
seemed almost like preparation for this
time because this was of a higher order
of clarity. It light becomes became
invisible. It was so such a high
frequency. The clarity was just
stunning.
And then your mind operates inside this
hyperclarity and it doesn't disturb it
at all. And there's
truly I mean I touching it just once
change your life forever. Just just to
know that it's there. And then the
following session,
detoxification, you know, a lot of
purification.
Five sessions later, about a year later,
being taken into it again,
a deeper experience of this reality.
This is the 50th session, and I was
going to be taken into it two more times
over the next three years. But something
happened in the 50th session that
changed my understanding of what that
whole project was. I was deep in the
hyperclarity of of diamond luminosity
towards the end of the session and all
of a sudden a part of my visual field
opened and turned 90 degrees and I saw a
reality of light
far far in the distance. It had a
galactic kind of quality and a beam of
that light came and hit me and it
completely [snorts] stomped me and
shattered me and I was in the diamond
velocity consciousness at the time. And
I called it the absolute light. But what
it showed me was
even though the diamond of velocity felt
like the the homecoming of homecomings,
there had been many homecomings. just
felt like can't get better than this.
Even then I learned that there are
deeper and deeper dimensions of reality
beyond even where I had reached. And
that's when I learned that I had made a
false assumption. I had made an
assumption that eventually you get to an
end point, some end point of the journey
that is culmination, brings peace,
brings enlightenment, brings you. And
what I learned was, no, that's not the
way it works. You can stop anywhere
along the way. You can take the
blessings that are given you at any part
along the way, take them and live with
them and be enriched by them.
But it's an infinite progression. You'll
never get to the end of it. And that's
why one of the reasons I'd be gentler
with myself, I've learned that it's not
about getting somewhere. It's about
changing the porocity of the membrane
between you and physical reality and
spiritual reality. And it's becoming
wiser and letting more of the energy of
spiritual reality into your life which
can be done gently, physically,
psychedelically,
uh therapeutically.
It's not about getting somewhere. I got
about as far as I've seen anybody get.
and uh great great respect for the
masters who actually live in communion
with those levels of reality.
at at some of the lower subtler levels.
[clears throat] It's been my experience
that as I I think burn off some of my
conditioning which filtered reality, I
became highly intuitive and I would even
say psychic and I had experiences that I
verified on psychedelics which then
allowed me to have similar experiences
in meditation, in dreams and just
walking around. And you talked about the
magic in the classroom and I wondered if
you could talk tell us a little bit
about how this happened for you.
>> Yeah. Well, I was in an interesting test
circumstance, wasn't I? I was doing this
massive journey privately and I was
teaching surrounded by people all week
long and but I couldn't tell them about
my work. You know, I could even talk
about psychedelics, but I couldn't talk
about my use of psychedelics.
Uh
and so I had years and years of students
going through my classes and taking
courses with me for a number of years,
intro, me, intermediate, advanced
courses.
And I found that
the the oneness that I was experiencing
in my psychedelic sessions, the truth,
the fundamental truth of oneness,
permutations of oneness,
somehow
opened up aspects of my own personalized
version of that, tapping into that
oneness
and my students minds began to be enter
into my mind and I would I would be
reaching for an example just to make a
point and I would give an example that I
just made up. The student would come up
after class and say, you know, it's
interesting that you would use that
example because that's exactly what
happened to me this week. And this
happened over and over and over again.
And then I I began to realize that they
were having sometimes very deep
experiences around certain we would say
mystical concepts that I was presenting
just in teaching Hinduism, teaching
atman is Brahman, teaching uh the atman
self, teaching Buddhism, teaching uh
emptiness,
shunata, emptiness of self and just
describing some of these concepts and
they were having very deep experiences.
of these realities. And it was as if the
fact that to some degree I had the
memory of these experiences living
within me, it created a feel which
activated their potential to awaken into
these experiences. I felt like I was a a
lightning rod in the middle of a unified
field. And some of the things I was
saying were hitting students in very
very deep places. Some of these examples
were really
deep wounds that they were carrying,
deep questions that they had been
carrying for years. And I had my
students do a lot of writing in my
courses. So I I got the backstory of
their working with these various ideas.
So I it was as if my classroom was
demonstrating a fundamental truth that I
learned in the sessions and that is
states of consciousness are contagious.
Clarified states of consciousness are
contagious. Anger in destructive states
of consciousness are contagious. There's
a field of of around us that's we
radiate. We are part of this field and
experience radiates out 360°.
I also learned that uh there are fields
in the classroom. There is a class field
which influences individual students and
I can feel it. I can it influences me.
And then I learned that there is a
course field which is a deeper field w
which is composed like a morphic field
of all the students learning who have
ever studied this c this material with
me over time. So the class field of the
present students but the course field is
a field which surrounds a person's
activity in the world. If I were a
surgeon it would be a surgical field. If
I were a coach, it'd be a performance
excellence kind of feel. I'm a teacher.
It's an education field. So that the
learning of my past students creates an
energized context through which new you
students learn and they learn certain
things faster and they they because of
the course field, they want to start at
more advanced levels of the discussion.
And I found I had to revise my courses
periodically in order to keep up keep up
with these pivots that my students were
making. And it could be just, you know,
cultural norms and and the the
socialization that takes place
internally collapses around faculty. But
I think it's more than that. I think
that
the unified universe that we see in our
sessions that the unification the
fundamental truth of nonduality
the truth of individuality
extended through reincarnation but not
an isolated individuality an open
interfacing interconnected individuality
that's in conscious exchange with its
environment through time
all of that Just knowing that, just
living that, putting it in a quiet
place, it bubbles up around you. Things
happen. And that's what I call the
magic. And the magic is when
porocity happens. It's like, and I
developed a way of teaching. I call
quantum pedagogy. In my book, the living
classroom, it's a way of teaching which
not only affirms the truth of individual
minds. That's the animistic pedagogy.
But it also truth affirms the underlying
truth of the wholeness that holds those
individual minds. Is there substance?
Yeah. You you describe the soul as kind
of an integration system for all of our
past lives and experiences, but also in
the context of the future human. It
seems to me like we're all kind of being
pulled together towards a collective
mind where we maintain our
individuality. And it seems in in
microcosm that's what you're describing
in in the magic you saw in your
classroom. Is that how we should think
about the future human as it's
manifesting? H
you know in all of our science fiction
uh whenever this unitive consciousness
pokes up it turns human beings into
automatons. It takes away their
individuality. The Borg assimilates us
all. It's the only way we can think of
it. But really when a a field
consciousness emerges it wakes us up.
It's a it's a higher field. It's a
connective field. It lifts our
individual potential. Sometimes in a
very highly energized room, I would copy
down the blackboard at the end of class
cuz I learned things. I saw things more
clear in under this influence. Right? So
it it's a field that potentiates
individual consciousness.
Now
to me
I have an image in my mind of
interacting fields which cross in the
individual
which the broader the field and the
deeper the field
the more it influences an individual's
energy and one lives in that field in a
in a in a way I think in some ways uh
I used to think of the BTO as an
obstacle. I want to get through the BTO
and get to get to the divine realm of
the Now I think of the BTO as kind of a
security blanket. It's a it keeps us
safe while our individuality is getting
stronger and stronger with practice,
more reincarnation, getting stronger,
clearer, more compassionate, more
intelligent, more understanding.
If you touch the divine light or the
divine radiance
without having a very strong clear
field, it shatter. It just it just
shatters you. It's like a an overload.
You can't even remember it. You can't
put words around. But if you have done
your homework in a way and you enter
into that field and can hold the
position of merger with that field, but
it's not a merger that eliminates the
center. It's a merger that nourishes and
expands and draws on the center.
I think something like that must be like
reincarnation. We work our way through
deeper deeper. We come in what Monroe
calls the last timer of the outer ring.
And then we enter dimensions of light
that are the light that sustains the
universe.
It takes a lot of inner strength and
inner work to sustain the encounter. Uh
and I think that's just probably just
the tips of the robes of this reality.
uh just the tips of you're grabbing
light
and it it's just the tips of the edges.
I think sometimes I've had visions of
the universe, the great mother holding
its child, humanity, loving its child
and not able to touch it. Because if it
touched it, the power of its love sends
a child into screaming pain cuz so much
love, so much energy so fast is more
than it can handle. And I think humanity
is in the arms of the universe. And the
universe is growing this child of
humanity. And we are about to we're
coming into a time where I think some
integration and synthesis of all of our
former lives is taking place.
We're we're kind of wrapping our lives
together and the lives that manifest
first are maybe the lives that need the
most help, the lives that are carrying
the most pain. So therapy, healing,
former lives takes forefront.
But in my experience,
there comes a point when all of these
lives are brought together and
integrated and they become one. In my
experience, when they became one, there
was an explosion of light of diamond
light from my chest. I was catapulted
into a level beyond any level I had
gotten into up at that point in time.
And I was an individual,
but I was an individual beyond any frame
of reference I ever known before.
And then only over time came back in.
I have had experiences that fuse the
idea, the understanding that humanity is
coming to a crescendo. Humanity is
coming to a spiritual a crescendo of a
spiritual journey that's been going on
for thousands, hundreds of thousands of
years. We're giving birth to the next
generation of the human species. We're
giving birth to the next form of
humanity. What is that form? What will
it be? And I think the form is apparent
in our past. We've been gestating this
future human for thousands of
incarnations, hundreds and hundreds of
incarnations.
Now we are experiencing the labor which
is a dangerous time, a painful time, but
a labor of giving birth to the
integrated soul into history. So that by
the time humanity makes this pivot and I
don't think it's going to be a fast
pivot I think it's going to be
generational kind of pivot
the blueprint the archetypal structure
the substructure of the human psyche the
collective psyche will have shifted the
blueprint will have shifted and the soul
will find more natural anchor we will
exist as human beings as souls
with all of our knowledge intact. And of
course that means extraordinary
compassion because we have been all the
people in the world. We have been all
the races all the and we can we have a
felt sense of relationship with not just
our immediate family but hundreds and
thousands of beings in the world. So
it's an awakening I think of oneness
that leads to community and it's
awakening of oneness that leads to
deeper transparency with the surrounding
intelligence the total intelligence.
So I think we're entering that time I my
visions
that were given to me I had no control
over what was given to me consistently
showed humanity coming into what you
might call
a dark night of our collective soul. The
dark night is a time of purification.
And I think in a sense all the evils,
all the toxins of history are being
purged in this kaliuga time. all the
hatreds, all the animosities, all the
>> Do you see this as a phase shift that
sweeps everyone up with it or I think a
lot of listeners are familiar with
different developmental models like
integral or spiral dynamics where
everybody's born at stage zero and they
work or stage one and they work their
way up and there's a leading edge shout
out to this community of people who are
pushing into new boundaries but it does
and that has some kind of collective
consciousness impact but it doesn't
necessarily mean that everyone goes with
it. Do you think this is more of a
all-inclusive phase shift?
>> I understand what you're talking about
and there are certain thinkers who think
that humanity is dividing that those who
can follow the ascending energy can make
the pivot. They'll go in one direction.
The ones who can't, they'll be taken
care of, but they're going to be taken
care of on another planet. They're
they're off planet. I hope that isn't
true. I hope that we remain unified as a
species. I hope the the slowgoers
make the same jump forward. I mean, I
don't know. I don't have a clarity on
all the levels how it's going to
manifest, what's it going to be.
The some of my experience towards the
end of my session was going into what I
call deep time. I'd been into expanded
boundaries of time
and I went into the deepest states of
deep time that I had ever been. It was
excruciating ordeal to get there but I
went into deep time and I experienced
the archetypal form of the future human.
the beauty,
the wisdom, the magnificent intelligence
and compassion of that being.
I really believe that this is
an a species shift that we're trying to
make. I don't understand how it's going
to happen. But
the guidance which gives gives to me
over and over again is
we are being helped from a all sides.
Nature is doing this. We're not doing
this. We're writing it. Nature is doing
this. Nature is much much bigger and
deeper than we are.
We're going into a period of great pain
and great suffering.
My understanding is that the depth of
this pain and the breadth of it touching
all the people on the planet in varying
ways
activates
reactions, responses not just in the
personal psyche but within the
collective psyche. It produces an
instability of the field of the
collective psyche. It takes the
collective psyche in from a linear
condition into nonlinear conditions. And
we know something about how fields in
behave in nonlinear states. But when the
human psyche is is hyper stimulated by
the depth of disruption and chaos that
we're coming into
it, it creates the conditions that makes
it more more able to facilitate that
creativity can come through. Catalytic
conversions can happen in this highly
aroused state. And the message was this
is going to happen much faster than we
could ever think before. Much faster.
Much faster. And it was precisely
because of the nonlinear conditions of
arousal
and those nonlinear dissensions being
engendered by uh pain and by novelty and
confusion. There's a price to be paid.
In this we will be drawn deeper into the
human heart and we will be forced almost
to rise to the occasion
in a way that breaks the heart, breaks
us open
in a way that is permanent. the way that
people get together on on you know
facing great tragedies, floods,
earthquakes but this is something which
reaches so deeply that it permanently
changes the tilt something essential in
the human psyche.
>> Can you say say more about the heart?
Um, I've heard it said that primitive
humans experienced the seat of
consciousness to be in the belly when
they were more instinctual. And we all
tend to think we exist in the forehead.
And some great spiritual adepts have
described the seat of consciousness as
moving down into the heart and life
actually being experienced from that
place. Does that make sense to you in
your experience?
>> It makes sense in my experience. And
here I just draw on chakra theory, the
understanding of the seven chakras.
The third chakra being the belly of the
seat of power. The fourth chakra, the
heart, is where compassion opens. It's
when you begin to feel the great breath
of your being. Uh it it first it it
arises with the quest for justice, but
then it emerges deeper into lives of
compassion. Uh and then of course
there's the the throat chakra of
creativity, the brow chakra of the
awakening of paranormal insight of the
insights that go beyond physical senses
and the crown chakra is the experience
of oneness.
And all of these are all and all the way
down to pleasure at the very bottom uh
in survival. All of these are all
energetically connected. So naturally
when you open one it not only opens the
valve going but it opens the valve going
down. So I think I think what we're
going through in some way collectively
will be centered on the heart because
my understanding is my experience is
that we're coming into an awakening of
the birth of oneness in the human heart.
We are awake. We're scientifically we're
seeing oneness everywhere we go in
fields in quantum theory. But there is
an awakening of oneness that allows us
to open in compassion more the feeling
the understanding that we really are in
this together. We're all this is one
family.
Once the heart is open
then we won't use weapons. Nature will
be safe from us. Other people will be
safe from us. We won't use our knowledge
to destroy and and
expand at the expense of other beings.
All of our from here up it starts with
oneness.
We're feeding into drawing in energy
understanding that comes from above
opening up into paranormal dimensions of
understanding and culminating in this
utterly natural
abiding awareness
of the oneness that underlies all
reality and is ever present. Always has
been, always will be, unchanging. It's
there.
Um, we've come to the end of our time
and one of the things I loved is that,
you know, you you waited 20 years in
many ways to to communicate and
integrate
these unbelievably intense mystical
experiences.
And what if you could sort of sit on the
other side of the screen and speak to
someone that hasn't had the benefit of
these experiences and and probably
desperately needs the insights that that
you accumulated. What would you say to
the materialist or the nihilist or the
relatively hopeless person in this
situation who hasn't had the benefit of
your direct experiences?
well
read
uh their books and when you go deeply
into the thoughts and ideas in the books
it activates you. I I've taken students
into near-death episode literature. I've
been in Kenry's book for decades and
students when they really take in
information deeply it changes them. They
begin to have different experiences. It
changes them. If you take in the
literature in psychedelics, if you take
in the literature on um
on ordinary experiences in general, uh
it's so it opens belief, it opens uh it
opens the understanding.
It's good to be you know one of the um
one of the pillars of Buddhism is called
sangha community and it's good to be
gathered with people who are seekers uh
they that that's what I understand
leading edge to be community is
it helps us grow faster we grow faster
when we grow together um and I think
there
that's taking place in different places
um
Yeah.
>> Well,
Dr. Chris Bash, Deon Martin, uh, thank
you so much for joining us today. I'm
incredibly inspired by your message and
and hope we can help it reach more
people.
>> Thank you very much. I've really enjoyed
our conversation.
>> Thank you. Me as well.